Did Rosalind Franklin discover the structure of DNA?

The discovery of the structure of DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, remains one of the landmark scientific achievements of the 20th century. In April 1953, in an issue of the scientific journal Nature, James Watson and Francis Crick, researchers at the Cavendish Lab at Cambridge University, published a short paper, less than a page long, proposing a molecular structure for DNA, which consisted of two intertwined helices, most commonly known as the double helix. While it would take further scientific investigation to confirm this structure, today, there is broad scientific consensus that the 1953 structure proposed by Watson and Crick is correct. In 1962, James Watson, Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins, a colleague at King's College, were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, for "their discoveries concerning the molecular structure of nucleic acids and its significance for information transfer in living material."

Humans have implicitly understood the concept of genetics and heritable traits for thousands of years. Over 9000 years ago, Mesoamerican groups were selectively breeding corn. In the old world, cruciferous vegetables of the Brassica genus were selectively bred to yield different vegetables, such as broccoli, kale and Brussels sprouts. Between 1856 and 1863, the Augustinian, Austrian monk Gregor Mendel bred pea plants, demonstrating the concept of "simple inheritance", where two plants with different versions of the same gene, called alleles, can pass down different versions to their offspring, giving rise to distinct physical variations, called phenotypes. And, of course, in 1859, the famous biologist Charles Darwin would publish his landmark text, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, in which he proposes the theory of evolution.

While these discoveries demonstrated an understanding that creatures inherited physical traits from their ancestors, it was only in the late 19th century that we began to understand the biochemical mechanisms by which this occurs. In 1869, Swiss chemist Friedrich Miescher isolated the DNA molecule, and in the early 20th century, biochemist Phoebus Levene identified the key chemical components of DNA. The molecule contained four different bases, called nucleotides. These are:

Guanine (purine)
Thymine (pyrimidine)
Cytosine (pyrimidine)
Adenine (purine)

These four bases work together to transmit information. The molecule also contains a sugar-phosphate backbone. In DNA, the guanine pairs with cytosine, and the adenine pairs with thymine. In the 1940s, Erwin Chargaff proved that these pairings were not in equal amounts, with the amounts of adenine matching the amount of thymine, and the amount of guanine equalling the amount of cytosine. In 1952, Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase, working at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, demonstrated that viruses transmitted their genetic information using DNA, which provided important clues towards proving that DNA was, in fact, the encoding mechanism used to pass down genes from parents to offspring.

By the 1950s, we knew the chemical composition of DNA, but not the structure of the molecule. Understanding the molecular structure of DNA is key to understanding how our cells use its information to create the proteins that help shape our physiology. By this point, the question of the structure of DNA was highly topical in the scientific community, with high-profile scientists proposing their own models for the structure of DNA. Linus Pauling, a biochemist who would go on to win the Nobel Prize twice and develop the concept of electronegativity, proposed a three-stranded structure of DNA in early 1953, with the purines and pyrimidine bases on the outside, two months before Watson and Crick would publish their landmark paper. Pauling's model was quickly disproven, but its publication created a sense of urgency at Cambridge to be the first to propose the correct model. Watson and Crick's resulting paper would go on to be highly impactful, and is a seminal paper in the field of molecular biology.

Before continuing, we should briefly introduce our "main characters": James Watson was an American researcher in his mid-20s at the time of the discovery. He completed his undergraduate degree at the University of Chicago in Zoology in 1947, and completed his PhD in microbiology at Indiana University Bloomington in 1950, at the age of 22. His doctorate was supervised by Italian biochemist Salvador Luria, who would win the Nobel Prize himself in 1969, and is the namesake of Luria Broth, a medium used to grow bacteria in the lab. Originally interested in ornithology, Watson was highly ambitious, and seeing the rapid pace of microbiology research at the time, sought out Luria to be his PhD supervisor. After his graduation, he spent a year as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Copenhagen under another noteworthy biochemist, Herman Kalckar, although their research interests quickly diverged. He arrived at Cambridge in September 1951, and heard Maurice Wilkins give a talk on the applications of x-ray crystallography on DNA, reinforcing his interest in the applications of the technology.

Francis Crick was a Brit from Northampton, who had originally begun his scientific career as a physicist at University College London, doing a PhD researching the viscosity of water at high temperatures, which would be abandoned when his laboratory was destroyed during the Second World War. He spent the remainder of the conflict doing research for the Admiralty, the department of the British government that commands the Royal Navy. By 1947, Crick had resumed his academic career, this time at Cambridge, and shifted his interests towards the biological sciences, as he too had witnessed the rapid pace of advancement in the field at the time. Initially, Crick worked on researching the physical properties of cytoplasm, before moving to the Cavendish Lab, where he would discover the structure of DNA. He would receive his PhD from Cambridge in 1954.

In recent years, as the presence and awareness of the impact of female researchers on science has grown, you will often see comments online, alleging that James Watson and Francis Crick "stole" the discovery of the structure of DNA from a colleague, Rosalind Franklin. Franklin was a chemist who had received her PhD from Cambridge in 1945. By 1951, she was working at King's College London on a fellowship, and was a subject matter expert in the field of x-ray crystallography, an imaging technique that offers clues to the atomic structure of molecules. When x-rays pass through a target molecule, they pass through the cloud of electrons that surrounds the nucleus, showing the bonds between the atoms. Clever and experienced scientists can use high quality x-ray diffraction images to make inferences about the atomic structure of a molecule.

Franklin was originally supposed to work with proteins and lipids at King's College, but was reassigned by the lab director, John Randall, to work with Maurice Wilkins, who was leading a research group investigating the structure of DNA, and assigned her a PhD student, Raymond Gosling. Gosling himself would go on to receive his PhD from King's College in 1954. This reassignment immediately caused friction in the research group; Wilkins was soft-spoken and timid, whereas Franklin was brash and opinionated, and the two immediately developed a mutual dislike. Although literature sometimes states that Wilkins was Franklin's superior, this is a misunderstanding, intentionally disseminated by James Watson, who refers to Franklin as a "research assistant" in his book. In actuality, Wilkins and Franklin were to be co-researchers in the group.

Before proceeding, we should also discuss the physical locations in this story. Watson and Crick were researchers at the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge, and were largely focused on theoretical model building. Franklin, Wilkins and Gosling were performing their research at King's College in London. Franklin had a far more rigorous, modern approach to scientific research, with a heavy emphasis on experimental data. Both groups were in regular contact with each other and fraternised, with Wilkins being a personal friend of Crick's.

In her first year in the lab, Franklin noted "Evidence for spiral structure. Straight chain untwisted is highly improbable. Absence of reflections on meridian in crystalline form suggests spiral structure" in her research notes, although the helical structure of DNA was already popular in the scientific community, having been first proposed by Danish researcher Sven Furberg. She and Gosling also established that there were two different isomers of DNA; that is, two different structural configurations, of the DNA molecule, A-DNA, which they referred to as "crystalline", and B-DNA, which they termed "wet." In November 1951, Franklin presented these findings to colleagues at King's College, suggesting that DNA was either a double or triple helix. Due to the growing divide in the lab and animosity between Wilkins and Franklin, Randall assigned Wilkins to work on B-DNA and Franklin to work on A-DNA. At this time, Watson and Crick were building theoretical models based on ongoing research output from various labs in Europe and North America.

For a moment, let us take a step back and think about what these scientists are attempting to achieve here. Humans have never seen molecules, let alone atoms, with the naked eye. We can only make inferences about their nature and structure from their behaviour and observation using sophisticated scientific instruments. In this instance, these scientists are attempting to assemble a jigsaw puzzle, with numerous changing parts, where they don't know what the "correct" solution looks like, using shadows from x-rays. This would be a significant scientific challenge, even with modern equipment.

By 1952, Franklin was no longer convinced that A-DNA was helical in nature. She and Gosling wrote a fake obituary for helical A-DNA, to poke fun at Wilkins, who still believed that both forms of DNA were helical (he ended up being correct).

At this time, Franklin and Gosling were aggressively collecting more experimental data. In May 1952, Gosling took the famous "photo 51" that would be used as a crucial piece of evidence to support Watson and Crick's model. Producing x-ray crystallographic images takes a prolonged period of time; after identifying the A and B isomers of DNA, Franklin realised that humidity fluctuations were causing the DNA molecule to shift between isomers during the imaging process, which could take over two days. Franklin and Gosling built a specialised experimental apparatus, strictly controlling the humidity of the environment over 62 hours while the image was produced, creating exceptionally clear pictures. Photo 51, the 51st image they produced, was set aside, as it was of the B form of DNA, which Franklin was not focusing on, as per her deal with Wilkins.

In February 1953, a team from Cambridge, including Max Perutz, Crick's PhD supervisor, visited King's College to review their research, as part of the Medical Research Council's biennial report. Perutz returned and shared the report with Crick, which included crucial data about DNA compiled by Franklin, including unit-cell measurements, which could be used to deduce interatomic distances. Much debate has occurred about whether Perutz should have shared this report.

By 1953, Franklin was fed up with the toxic work environment at King's College, and committed to leave for Birkbeck College, now part of the University of London. Gosling was reassigned to Wilkins as his new supervisor, and he dutifully handed over his and Franklin's research notes and photos to Wilkins. Around this time, James Watson visited King's College and spoke with Wilkins. After some discussion, Wilkins pulled out the now famous photo 51 from a drawer and showed it to Watson. In his book, Watson describes the moment Wilkins showed him photo 51:

Watson immediately understood the importance of photo 51. Crick had previously published a paper in Acta Crystallographica, describing the theoretical crystallography of a helix. Watson also immediately recognised the dark areas at the top and bottom of the photo as the sugar phosphate backbone of two distinct strands.

Upon returning to Cambridge, Watson and Crick set to work on building a model out of metal plates and wires, but found they were still confused about the precise nature of the base pairing on the interior of the double helix. Watson was still convinced that the bases on the inside followed a "like-with-like" pairing, but the position of the hydrogen atoms on the bases made it impossible to form the hydrogen bonds that keep both helices together. The final piece of the puzzle came when a colleague, chemist Jerry Donohue, visiting from the USA on a six-month fellowship, suggested that the bases were likely in the keto form, changing the locations of the hydrogens on the molecule. Playing around with the model, Watson and Crick realised that the base pairings were adenine-thymine and guanine-cytosine, and that the strands were facing in opposite directions, referred to as "antiparallel". Such a model aligned perfectly with the previously discovered Chargaff's rule.

With these final realisations, the A-T/C-G base pairing and the antiparallel strands, Watson and Crick were able to assemble their final model. Crick famously went across a street to The Eagle Pub in Cambridge, proclaiming that they had "discovered the secret of life".

The model built by Watson and Crick at the Cavendish lab set out a few basic principles that, mostly, still stand today:

DNA is a double helix, two intertwined strands with bases on the inside. Adenine creates hydrogen bonds with thymine, and cytosine with guanine, holding the two strands together through hydrogen bonding and allowing for other molecules to interact with the DNA.
The sugar-phosphate backbones are antiparallel, i.e. running in opposite directions. In organic chemistry, the carbon atoms in a molecule are numbered according to set rules. If you were to cut the DNA molecule at a pair of nucleotides, then one strand would terminate at the 5' carbon, and the other at the 3' carbon.
The model built by Watson and Crick was right-handed. That is, if you point your right thumb along the axis of the double helix towards the 3' end, the direction you would curl your fingers is the direction of the helix. Scientists have since discovered a left-handed version of the molecule, Z-DNA, but this was not known at the time.

In the initial paper published in Nature announcing their model, Watson and Crick acknowledge Donohue, Wilkins, Franklin, and their coworkers at King's College, writing:

Reportedly, Wilkins had been offered co-authorship, but declined. In the same issue, Franklin and Gosling published a paper entitled "Molecular Configuration in Sodium Thymonucleate", sodium thymonucleate being a historical name for the sodium salt of DNA. In the paper, Franklin and Gosling describe their experimental setup and methods for imaging DNA retrieved from calves, and discuss their evidence that DNA is helical, that the phosphate groups are in the outer sugar-phosphate backbone, and that the molecule has a diameter of 20 Angstroms. Wilkins, Stokes, and another colleague, Herbert Wilson, published a paper in the same issue, titled "Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: Molecular Structure of Deoxypentose Nucleic Acids". While all three papers dealt with aspects of the crystallography and molecular structure of DNA, ultimately, Watson and Crick have taken the bulk of the credit for the discovery.

Between her leaving King's College and her death, Franklin worked on structures of the tobacco mosaic and polio viruses with colleagues J.D. Bernal and Aaron Klug. Klug would also go on to win the Nobel Prize in 1982, and would publicly advocate for the recognition of Franklin's work on the structure of DNA, using her research notes to argue that she was closer to discovering the structure of DNA than Watson claimed. Reportedly, Franklin remained on good terms with Francis Crick and his wife, who visited her and exchanged correspondence during her final illness.

Watson returned to the United States in 1956 and worked for the biology department at Harvard University, before becoming the Director of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. He would leave in 2007, after making controversial statements about a link between race and intelligence. Watson died in 2025.

Crick received his PhD in 1954 and continued research in the field of molecular biology, helping to discover the mechanisms by which organisms use the information encoded by DNA to manufacture proteins. In 1957, he coined the term "central dogma" of molecular biology, referring to how DNA is used to produce RNA, which is translated into proteins. In the 1970s, he became a Distinguished Research Professor at the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences in California. He died in San Diego in 2004.

In 1962, Watson, Crick and Wilkins shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discovery. Neither Franklin nor Gosling was mentioned in the Nobel citation. Franklin had died in 1958 of ovarian cancer, possibly due to her years of exposure to radiation from her research, although ovarian cancer is disproportionately common in people of Ashkenazi Jewish heritage. While the Nobel Institute only explicitly updated their statutes to exclude dead awardees in 1974, a longstanding unwritten rule held that Nobel laureates should be living.

In 1968, Watson would publish a memoir titled "The Double Helix", a first-hand account of the discovery of DNA, which recounted his version of the events surrounding the discovery of the structure of DNA. The book was immediately controversial, and evoked public responses from a number of the researchers involved. In it, Watson is not outright hostile to Franklin, but refers to her as "Rosy" (a nickname she hated) and portrays her as a hot-headed lab assistant, and describes intentionally antagonising her. This book, as well as other comments Watson made in interviews, specifically regarding scientific racism, brought much controversy, although he would remain a high-profile scientist until his death. The book is commonly viewed as being unfair to Franklin, and failing to adequately recognise her contributions to the discovery.

Maurice Wilkins wrote his own autobiography in 2003, shortly before his death. Titled "The Third Man of the Double Helix: The Autobiography of Maurice Wilkins", it has also been criticised for giving insufficient credit to Stokes, Wilson, and other colleagues, though the book was not as widely read as The Double Helix.

Many today argue about whether or not the discovery of DNA was "stolen" from Franklin. While her work was crucial to the eventual paper that is credited with the discovery, the truth is very nuanced, and "stolen" is not an accurate term. A more accurate claim would be that Watson and Crick used Franklin's data without crediting her, a contribution that would at least merit her getting her name on the paper today, although there are arguably several individuals who also deserved this honour, including Gosling and Wilkins, one of the few members of the research groups who was a biochemist and focused on the molecular structure of DNA from the very beginning. A few key factors that undermine the claim that the discovery was stolen include:

Ultimately, the final model was assembled by Watson and Crick, which included crucial details, such as anti-parallelism and the exact base pairings. Unfortunately, history doesn't often give partial marks for discoveries.
Photo 51, the usual piece of evidence cited as proof that her work was stolen, was taken by Franklin's student, Raymond Gosling. If the argument holds that photo 51 being used constitutes "stealing the discovery", then it would be as much his work being stolen as Franklin's. Unfortunately, the reality of scientific research is that lead researchers often take the credit, attention, and funding opportunities that come from major discoveries, that were often enabled by a much larger team of lab assistants, students, post docs, and other researchers.
In the same vein, many of the core elements of Watson and Crick's model had already been proposed by other researchers, such as the structure of each strand of the DNA molecule (proposed by Alexander Todd's research group), and the helical structure (first proposed by Sven Furberg, and then by Franklin's colleague Alexander Stokes). Furberg was also one of the first to suggest a model with the bases on the inside, although he only proposed a single helix. It is never alleged that Crick and Watson stole Furberg's data.
Franklin was an accomplished researcher who published an article in Nature with Gosling, the very same issue as Watson and Crick's paper, and was capable of announcing the discovery had she determined the correct structure. However, Franklin had shifted her focus to the A form of DNA by that point, while photo 51 was of the B form. Another unfortunate reality of invention and scientific discovery is that being first to write your findings down in a format that is acceptable to the broader scientific community is an important step towards getting credit for your work. Alexander Graham Bell, for instance, famously arrived at the patent office mere hours before Elisha Gray, a rival inventor, and is credited with inventing the telephone, even though numerous other inventors, such as Antonio Meucci, likely had working prototypes long before Bell.

What is true, however, is that Franklin's work and role in the discovery were downplayed, both by James Watson and other colleagues, as well as much of the mainstream scientific community and media, due to rampant sexism at the time. Watson used his book to portray Franklin as an angry lab assistant who was incapable of drawing her own conclusions, whilst using her data and evidence to inform his own research. Franklin was a leading expert in x-ray crystallography, and she and Gosling spent a large amount of time fine-tuning the crystallographic process to image DNA, which resulted in photo 51, which caused Watson to have his "eureka" moment about the precise structure of the molecule.

It is worth noting that both the Cavendish lab and King's College had other high-profile female researchers, who had more positive relationships with the male researchers, so it is possible that personal animosity played a factor. One of the first colleagues to see the completed model of DNA was Dorothy Hodgkin, who would go on to win a Nobel Prize herself for the discovery of the structure of vitamin B12.

Today, a plaque at King's College recognises five key researchers for their role in the discovery of the structure of DNA:

Rosalind Franklin
Maurice Wilkins
Raymond Gosling
Alexander Stokes
Herbert Wilson

Watson and Crick obviously deserve recognition for the discovery, as do Donohue and other colleagues.

However, to credit any one person, or argue that the discovery was "stolen", is folly. Scientific discovery is the result of humanity's drive for knowledge, and the compounding work of numerous dedicated researchers. As Newton said, "If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants."

Select references:

https://dosequis.colorado.edu/Courses/MethodsLogic/papers/WatsonCrick1953.pdf

https://labgenmol-fo-unam.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/the-double-helix-james-d.-watson.pdf

https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-conversation-with-james/

https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01347-8#MO0

https://www.ukri.org/blog/from-the-archive-rosalind-franklins-famous-photo-51/

https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/23/sexism-in-science-did-watson-and-crick-really-steal-rosalind-franklins-data

https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/discovery-of-dna-structure-and-function-watson-397/

https://www.mun.ca/biology/scarr/Franklins_crystallograph.html

https://embryo.asu.edu/pages/molecular-configuration-sodium-thymonucleate-1953-rosalind-franklin-and-raymond-gosling